**4.4.U1  Carbon dioxide and water vapor are the most significant greenhouse gases.​**
- [ ] State the sources of CO2 and water vapor in the atmosphere.
- [ ] Outline the mechanism by which greenhouse gases trap heat in the atmosphere.

**4.4.U2  Other gases including methane and nitrogen oxides have less impact.**
- [ ] State the sources of methane and NO gases in the atmosphere.

**4.4.U3  The impact of a gas depends on its ability to absorb long wave radiation as well as on its concentration in the atmosphere.**
- [ ] State two factors that determine the warming impact of a greenhouse gas.
- [ ] State two variables that determine the concentration of a gas in the atmosphere.
- [ ] Compare the impact of atmospheric methane to CO2.
- [ ] State how long water, methane and CO2 remain in the atmosphere, on average. ​

**4.4.U4  The warmed Earth emits longer wavelength radiation (heat).**
- [ ] State that the Earth absorbs short-wave energy from the sun and re-emits longer wavelengths.
- [ ] ​Compare wavelengths of UV, visible and infrared radiation.

**4.4.U5  Longer wave radiation is absorbed by greenhouse gases that retain the heat in the atmosphere.​**
- [ ] Explain the greenhouse effect, with reference to short wave radiation from the sun, long wave radiation from the Earth and the effects of ozone and greenhouse gases.
- [ ] Explain why water vapor, CO2, methane and NO are greenhouse gases.

**4.4.U6  Global temperatures and climate patterns are influenced by concentrations of greenhouse gases.​**​
- [ ] Explain why atmospheric CO2 concentration would logically impact global temperatures.
- [ ] Outline the effect of global temperature on climate, specifically location and frequency of of rain and frequency of severe storms.

**4.4.U7  There is a correlation between rising atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide since the start of the industrial revolution 200 years ago and average global temperatures.**
- [ ] State the atmospheric CO2 concentration prior to the industrial revolution.
- [ ] Outline the impact of the industrial revolution on atmospheric CO2 concentration.
- [ ] ​Describe the correlation between atmospheric CO2 concentrations since the industrial revolution and global temperatures.

**4.4.U8  Recent increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide are largely due to increases in the combustion of fossilized organic matter.**
- [ ] Explain why industrial revolution would increase atmospheric CO2 concentrations.

**4.4.A1  Correlations between global temperatures and carbon dioxide concentrations on Earth.​**
- [ ] Explain how historical temperature data has been collected.
- [ ] Using ice core data, outline the correlation between atmospheric CO2 concentration and global temperatures.

**4.4.A2  Evaluating claims that human activities are not causing climate change.**​
- [ ] Outline three reasons why there is vigorous debate around the claim that human activities are causing climate change.

**4.4.A3  Threats to coral reefs from increasing concentrations of dissolved carbon dioxide.**
- [ ] Outline the effect of atmospheric CO2 concentration on ocean pH.
- [ ] Describe the impact of lower ocean pH on animals that make skeletons from calcium carbonate.​

**4.4.NOS  Assessing claims-** **Evaluating claims that human activities are not causing climate change**
- [ ] Outline ways by which claims can be evaluated for truth.


