# Panama

Columbus was the first to explore the coast of Central America in circa 1502; however, it was Balboa who was the first to cross the Isthmus and see the Pacific Ocean in 1513. Panama's history as a colony of Spain began in 1519 when Panama City was established. Panama would remain a Spanish Colony until about 1821. From 1819 - 1821, [[Introduction to Latin America Notes#Part 5|Simon Bolivar]] fought for Independence and established Gran Colombia (Venezuela, Ecuador, Panama and Columbia). However, the individual countries then pushed for independence and Gran Colombia was dissolved in 1830.

The push for a canal across the Isthmus began to join the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The French attempt in the mid-1800s failed. Therefore, the United States began their negotiations for the canal with Colombia (who owned Panama). The Colombian government rejected the offer and then a revolt took place (supported by the USA). The United States recognized the newly independent Panama. The  newly independent Panama agreed to give the United States a perpetual lease on a 10 mile 16 km strip of land along the canal and in return the USA paid Panama \$10 million and other \$250,000 every year for the duration of the lease. The [[Panama Canal]] was completed in 1914.

IN 1904, The Constituent Assembly elected the first constitutional President of the Republic of Panama. The independent Panama was a democracy with a mandate of an elected president. However, sometimes the Panamanian government had periods of political instability and corruption.

In 1968, there was a military coup led by General Herrera. Eventually General Omar Torrijos took the power in this military junta. Under Torrijos's leadership, General [[Panama - Noriega|Manuel Noriega]] began to gain power as the head of Panama's secret police. Noriega had been recruited by the CIA in the 1960s as an informant for the USA on other Latin American countries activities, especially Nicaragua.

In 1981, General Torrijos died in an airplane accident. Noriega would consolidate power through his military power the use of "elected" puppet presidents. In 1983, the defense bill was passed that gave the Panama Defense Forces (FDP) control over Panama's security. Noriega was the commander in chief of the FPD and therefore, he held the ultimate power, even more than the President.

During the 1980's Noriega became implicated in drug trafficking and money laundering as well as his connections with Iran-Contra Scandal. The United States association with Noriega became a political liability for President Reagan and later President Bush. Therefore, the Untied States decided to end Noriega's power. In 1989, the United States invaded Panama in the operation "Just Cause". Noriega was taken prisoner, put on trial and finished serving his sentence in the United States in Sept. 2007. he was then extradited to France in April 2010 for murder and money laundering charges. Noriega was found guilty in France and sentenced to 7 years. However, on Sept. 23, 2011 he was granted a conditional release and extradited to Panama on October 1, 2011 to serve a 20 year sentence for murder and money laundering charges there was well.